## **Classifying Mountains with Photos and Neural Networks**

This project attempts to classify mountains \(let's call them "summits"\) into certain categories, specifically \(i\) which state the summit is in, and \(ii\) whether the summit is a named a "Mount", "Mountain", or "Peak".

As I am an avid hiker, I wondered if there were any convention to why some summits are called a mount \(e.g. "Mount Evans"\), a mountain \("Green Mountain"\), or a peak \("Pikes Peak"\). Apparently, there is no convention on this "summit type", although a few years ago, a college student named Stephen Abegg did a statistical evaluation using elevation, prominence \(how much higher is the summit relative to its neighbors\), and isolation \(a measure of distance between summits\) in a multinomial logistic regression and found a pattern that works most of the time. The pattern is:

* Mountains - tend to be lower elevation and rounded
* Mounts - tend to be high elevation and prominent
* Peaks - tend  to be pointed with other peaks nearby.

My idea is to see if a convolutional neural network \("cnn"\), an advanced algorythm used for classifying images, can replicate the results of the numeric regression model. While I'm at it, I thought I'd try to see the the cnn could classify the photos in other ways, e.g. predict which state the summit is in.

### Overview of Process

* Collection of data from listsofjohn: nearly 50,000 photos along with numerical data \(elevation, prominence, and isolation\)
* Replicating the regression using several numerical regression algorythms
* Properly labeling the mountains
* Building the program in Python:
  * Put all the data and references to image file locations in a PostgreSQL database
  * Preprocess the photos
  * Fit the model on various classifications \(by state or summit type\)
  * Run the fitted model on selected photo or photos of a given mountain and show the predicted classification
  * Build a user interface \("UI"\) so that anyone can pick a mountain in the database or  upload their own photo and see how the model classifies it.

### Data

I obtained all of my data from the listsofjohn.com website. listsofjohn is a website with information on nearly every summit in the United State, and it allows registered users to keep track of the summits they've hiked on the site. The adimisitor of the website, John Kirk, was exceptionally helpful in providing me the numerical data and links to directly download all of the nearly 50,000 photos on the website.

Following is a breakdown of the photos available by summit type and the top six states:

| Summit Type | \#Summits | \#Images |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Mount | 941 | 2,516 |
| Mountain | 4,316 | 9,293 |
| Peak | 3,403 | 8,291 |
| Ambiguous \(e.g. Mount Ellen Peak\) | 13 | 41 |
| None of the above | 15,085 | 28,882 |
| **Total** | 23,758 | 48,963 |

| State | \#Summits | \#Images |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1. Colorado | 6,311 | 20,138 |
| 2. Washington | 3,275 | 5,302 |
| 3. Idaho | 2,123 | 2,771 |
| 4. Utah | 2,000 | 4,019 |
| 5. New Mexico | 1,741 | 3,656 |
| 6. California | 1,548 | 2,660 |

1. **Minimum \#Photos per Class**: A cnn needs several thousand photos in each class \(e.g. state or summit type\) in order for it to adequately classify photos. The number of images of Mounts is only 2,516, and as we go down the list of states, the number of images available drops off, so I limited it to six states. I had the idea of trying to classify as photo as being in the Appalachain Mountains in the east versus the Rocky Mountains in the west, but I only have a total of 1,461 images for summits in all the Appalachian states versus over 37,000 images for summits in Rocky Mountain states. Even with upsizing, the number of images for Appalachia is insufficent.
2. **Class Balance**: Ideally, classifiers should have a similar number of items in each class that is being compared, i.e. a similar number of Mounts, Mountains, and Peaks. As is seen above, I have over 8,000 images of Mountains and Peaks, but only about 2,500 Mount images. I have over 20,000 images for Colorado, but only a few thousand for the other states. Class imbalance can be addressed with **resampling**, which involves various methods of upsampling the small sized classes and downsizing the larged sized classes. For upsampling, additional images can be generated by manipulating the existing photos in certain ways, e.g. taking a horizontal mirror image of an image and counting that as a new image for that class.
3. **Ambiguous Names**: One would think that whether a summit is called a Mount, Mountain, or Peak is pretty straightforward. However, consider names like "Mount Ellen Peak", "White Mountain-South Peak",  or "Mountaineer Peak".  "Mount Ellen Peak" is clearly ambiguous, but only 13 such summits out of 23,758 needed to be removed from summit type consideration for this. If a simple algorythm is used to search for summit names with more than one type in it, "White Mountain-South Peak" would turn up, although this is clearly a Mountain with more than one high point. Likewise, "Mountaineer Peak" would show up in a simple search as having both "Mountain" and "Peak" in its name, but "Mountain" is not a whole word in this case and this is clearly a Peak. Consequently, the algorythm to properly classify the names by summit type was ridiculously complicated given expectations.

### Image Processing

**Numpy Arrays**--For the cnn to process a photo, the photo is loaded into the program as an array of RGB numbers ranging from 0-255 representing the intensity of the colors of red, green, and blue. I used a widely-used library in Python called Numpy to manipulate the arrays.

**Cropping versus Zero-Padding**--As the cnn functions substanially more efficiently if all the photos are the same size, the photos, which came in varying sizes, needed to be resized to the same size. This could be done either by cropping the photos \(cutting off the edges\) on the sides where they are larger than my chosen standard photo size, or "zero-padding" could be added to the shorter sides to make them bigger. I tried it both ways to see which would work best.

**Downsize Photos**--CNN's use a considerable amount of computer processing power, and to make it easier on the computer, the photos were all downsized to the 100 x 100 pixels.

**Normalize Features**--The number in the array need to be converted to a standardized range \(I choose between 0 and 1\) in order for the CNN to work best.

**One Hot Encoding**--The cnn requires that classes of data be encoded with one hot vectors. For example, if it is comparing whether a summit is in CO versus WA, a summit in CO would be coded as \[1, 0\] and one in WA as \[0, 1\].

